docs/source/daml-integration-kit/index.rst, before:

.. Copyright (c) 2019 Digital Asset (Switzerland) GmbH and/or its affiliates. All rights reserved.
.. SPDX-License-Identifier: Apache-2.0

DAML Integration Kit - PRE-ALPHA
################################

The DAML Integration Kit allows third-party ledger developers to
implement a DAML Ledger on top of their distributed-ledger or database of
choice. How does that work?

A DAML Ledger implementation is a server serving the
:doc:`/app-dev/ledger-api-introduction/index` as per the semantics defined in
the :doc:`/concepts/ledger-model/index` and the
`DAML-LF specification <https://github.com/digital-asset/daml/blob/master/daml-lf/spec/daml-lf-1.rst>`_.
Theoretically, you could
implement such a server from scratch following the above documentation.
Practically, we strongly recommend to use our integration kit and following
the guides below to

- :ref:`implement <integration-kit_implementing>`
- :ref:`deploy <integration-kit_deploying>`
- :ref:`test <integration-kit_testing>`
- :ref:`benchmark <integration-kit_benchmarking>`

your own DAML Ledger server.

Using these guides, you can focus on your distributed-ledger or database of
choice and reuse our DAML Ledger server and DAML interpreter code for
implementing the DAML Ledger API.


Status and roadmap
******************

The current status of the integration kit is PRE-ALPHA. We expect it to evolve
to ALPHA soon, BETA later, and GA quite a bit later. The roadmap below
explains what we mean by these different statuses, and what's missing to
progress.

PRE-ALPHA (current status)
  We develop the DAML Integration Kit in an open-first model. The PRE-ALPHA
  status means that there is enough information for interested third-parties
  to follow the *development* of the DAML integration kit. **We do though not
  make any stability guarantees!** Moreover the documentation is expected to
  contain holes, which are usually linked to GitHub issues.

ALPHA (`tracking GitHub issue <https://github.com/digital-asset/daml/issues/658>`__)
  Once we reach ALPHA status, the DAML Integration Kit is ready to be used by
  third-parties willing to accept the following caveats:

  - The architecture includes everything required to run DAML Applications in
    production. However, it misses support for testing DAML Applications in a
    uniform way against different DAML Ledgers. Concretely this means that
    Ledger API authorization, package upload, party on-boarding, ledger reset,
    and time manipulation are specific to each DAML Ledger. The reason
    for this is that it requires us to introduce APIs
    for uniform *administrative DAML ledger access*,
    which is different from the uniform *per-party DAML ledger access* that the
    DAML Ledger API provides. We will address this before reaching BETA
    status.
  - The architecture is likely to change due to learnings from pioneers like
    you! Where possible we strive to make these changes backwards compatible.
    This might though not always be possible.
  - The documentation might be spotty in some places, and you might have to
    infer some of the documentation from the code.
  - Some of our code might be fresh off the press and might therefore have a
    higher rate of bugs.

  That said: we highly value your feedback and input to direct our attention
  to where it provides the most value!

  Below is the list of known missing work to reach ALPHA status. You can
  watch this GitHub issue to track our progress towards completing it.

  - Complete the **TODO (ALPHA)** items in this documentation.
  - Release the artifacts referenced in this documentation jointly with the
    DAML SDK and create self-contained DAML integration example in the
    `digital-asset/daml-on-x-example
    <https://github.com/digital-asset/daml-on-x-example>`__ GitHub repository.
    (`tracking GitHub issue <https://github.com/digital-asset/daml/issues/139>`__)
  - Implement the support for ledger-effective-time checks in the
    ``participant-state`` interface
    (`tracking GitHub issue <https://github.com/digital-asset/daml/issues/385>`__)


BETA (`tracking GitHub issue <https://github.com/digital-asset/daml/issues/660>`__)
  For us, BETA status means that we have architectural stability and solid
  documentation in place. At this point, third-parties should have everything
  they need to integrate DAML with their ledger of choice completely on their
  own.

  Before reaching BETA status, we expect to have:

  - hardened our test tooling
  - built tooling for benchmarking DAML ledgers
  - completed several integrations of DAML for different ledgers
  - implemented uniform *administrative DAML ledger access* to provide a
    portable way for testing DAML applications against different DAML ledgers

GA (`tracking GitHub issue <https://github.com/digital-asset/daml/issues/661>`__)
  For us GA (General Availability) means that there are several
  production-ready DAML ledgers built using the DAML Integration Kit. We
  expect to reach GA in 2019.


DAML Ledger overview
====================

**TODO (ALPHA):** explain what ledgers exist; and what state they are in.
(`GitHub issue <https://github.com/digital-asset/daml/issues/673>`__)


.. _integration-kit_implementing:

Implementing your own DAML Ledger
*********************************


Architectural overview
======================

We explain how to implement a DAML ledger backed by a specific
ledger `X`. The backing ledger can be a proper distributed ledger or also just a database.
The goal of this implementation is to allow multiple DAML applications, which are potentially run by
different entities, to execute multi-party workflows using the ledger `X`. We
illustrate this in the following diagram.

.. image:: images/architecture-overview.svg

.. original: https://www.lucidchart.com/invitations/accept/69799877-4e80-444d-96a3-3e90814e94df

We assume that the `X` ledger allows entities to participate in the
evolution of the ledger via particular nodes. In the remainder of this
documentation, we call these nodes `participant nodes`.

The boxes labeled `daml-on-<X>-server` denote the DAML Ledger API
servers, which implement the DAML Ledger API on top of the services provided
by the `X` participant nodes.

The boxes labeled `<X>-daml-validator` denote `X`-specific DAML transaction
validation services. In a distributed ledger they provide the ability for
nodes to :doc:`validate DAML transactions </concepts/ledger-model/ledger-integrity>`
at the appropriate stage in the `X` ledger's transaction commit process.
Whether they are needed, by what nodes they are used, and whether they are run
in-process or out-of-process depends on the `X` ledger's architecture. Above
we depict a common case where the participant nodes jointly maintain the
ledger's integrity and therefore need to validate DAML transactions.


Message flow
------------

**TODO (BETA):**

- explain to readers the life of a transaction at a high-level, so they have a
  mental framework in place when looking at the example code.
  (`GitHub issue <https://github.com/digital-asset/daml/issues/672>`__)


Implementing your server and validator
======================================

Each `X` ledger requires at least the implementation of a specific
`daml-on-<X>-server`. It might also require the implementation of a
`<X>-daml-validator` as explained above. We provide two kinds of code to
simplify their implementation:

- Scala libraries for validating DAML transactions and serving the
  Ledger API given implementations of two specific interfaces. See
  the `Library infrastructure overview`_ for an overview of these
  libraries.

- A complete example of a DAML Ledger backed by an in-memory key-value store,
  in the
  `digital-asset/daml-on-x-example <https://github.com/digital-asset/daml-on-x-example>`__
  GitHub repository.
  It builds on our Scala libraries and demonstrates how they
  can be assembled to serve the Ledger API and validate DAML transactions.

  For ledgers where data is shared between all participant nodes, we
  recommend using this example as a starting point for implementing your
  server and validator.

  For ledgers with stronger privacy models, this example
  can serve as an inspiration. You will need to dive deeper into how
  transactions are represented and how to communicate them to
  implement :doc:`DAML's privacy model </concepts/ledger-model/ledger-privacy>`
  at the ledger level instead of just at the Ledger API level.



Prerequisite knowledge
----------------------

Implementing your own server and validator requires a significant amount
of context to be learned before you can decide on your architecture and
implement it. Follow these three steps to acquire this context.

1. Complete the :doc:`/getting-started/quickstart`.
2. Get an in-depth understanding of the :doc:`/concepts/ledger-model/index`.
3. Build a mental model of how the :doc:`/app-dev/ledger-api-introduction/index`
   is used to build DAML Applications.


.. _integration-kit_writing_code:

Deciding on the architecture and writing the code
-------------------------------------------------

Once you've completed the above steps, we recommend following these four steps
to implement your own server and validator.

1. Clone our example DAML Ledger backed by an in-memory key-value store from
   the `digital-asset/daml-on-x-example <https://github.com/digital-asset/daml-on-x-example>`__.

   **TODO (ALPHA):** create this example repository
   (`issue <https://github.com/digital-asset/daml/issues/139>`__)

2. Read the example code jointly with
   the `Architectural overview`_ given above and
   the `Library infrastructure overview`_ given below.

3. Combine all the knowledge gained to decide on the architecture for your
   DAML on `X` ledger.

4. Implement your architecture; and let the world know about it by creating a
   PR against the
   `digital-asset/daml <https://github.com/digital-asset/daml>`__ repository
   to add your ledger to the `DAML Ledger overview`_.

Use the feedback form on this documentation page or GitHub issues on the
`digital-asset/daml <https://github.com/digital-asset/daml>`__ repository to
get into contact with us. Questions and feedback welcome!


Library infrastructure overview
-------------------------------

We provide the following four Scala libraries to help you implement your
server and validator. They are released as part of the DAML SDK. Changes
to them are explained as part of the :doc:`/support/release-notes`.
As explained in :ref:`integration-kit_writing_code`,
this section is best read jointly with the code in
`digital-asset/daml-on-x-example <https://github.com/digital-asset/daml-on-x-example>`__.

``participant-state.jar`` (`source code <https://github.com/digital-asset/daml/blob/master/ledger/participant-state/src/main/scala/com/daml/ledger/participant/state/v1/package.scala>`__)
  contains interfaces abstracting over the state of
  a participant node relevant for a DAML Ledger API server. These are the
  interfaces whose implementation is specific to a particular `X` ledger. These
  interfaces are optimized for ease of implementation.
``participant-state-index.jar`` (`source code <https://github.com/digital-asset/daml/tree/master/ledger/participant-state-index>`__)
  contains code for reading the abstract state
  of a participant node and indexing it to satisfy the read access
  patterns required for serving the Ledger API. The library provides both
  an interface enumerating all read access methods and an in-memory
  reference implementation of that interface.
  We expect to provide a persistent, SQL-backed index in the future
  (`tracking GitHub issue <https://github.com/digital-asset/daml/issues/581>`__).
``api-server-damlonx.jar`` (`source code <https://github.com/digital-asset/daml/blob/master/ledger/api-server-damlonx/src/main/scala/com/daml/ledger/api/server/damlonx/Server.scala>`__)
  contains code that implements a DAML Ledger API
  server given implementations of the interfaces in ``participant-state.jar``.
``daml-engine.jar`` (`source code <https://github.com/digital-asset/daml/blob/master/daml-lf/engine/src/main/scala/com/digitalasset/daml/lf/engine/Engine.scala>`__)
  contains code for serializing and deserializing DAML
  transactions and for validating them. An `<X>-daml-validator` is typically
  implemented by wrapping this code in the `X`-ledger's SDK for building
  transaction validators. ``daml-engine.jar`` also contains
  code for interpreting commands sent over the Ledger API. It is used
  by the `daml-on-<X>-server` to construct the transactions submitted
  to its participant node.

The following diagram shows how the classes and interfaces provided by these
libraries are typically combined to instantiate a DAML Ledger API server
backed by an `X` ledger.

.. image:: images/server-classes-and-interfaces.svg

.. original: https://www.lucidchart.com/invitations/accept/04239d8e-70ec-4734-b943-9780731fa704

The diagram uses boxes labeled with fully qualified class names to denote class instances.
It uses solid arrows labeled with fully qualified interface names to denote that an instance
depends on another instance providing that interface. It uses dashed arrows to
denote that a class instance provides or depends on particular services. It
uses boxes embedded in other boxes to denote that the outer class instance
creates the contained instances.

We explain the elements of the diagram in turn. For brevity, we drop prefixes
of their qualified names where unambiguous.

:doc:`/app-dev/ledger-api-introduction/index`
  is the collection of gRPC
  services that you would like your `daml-on-<X>-server` to provide.
``<X> services``
  are the services provided by our underlying ledger,
  which you aim to leverage to build your `daml-on-<X>-server`.
``<x>.LedgerApiServer``
  is the class whose main method or constructor
  creates the contained instances and wires them up to provide the Ledger API
  backed by the ``<X> services``. You need to implement this for your DAML on
  `X` ledger.
``WriteService`` (`source code <https://github.com/digital-asset/daml/blob/master/ledger/participant-state/src/main/scala/com/daml/ledger/participant/state/v1/WriteService.scala>`_)
  is an interface abstracting over the ability to submit
  DAML transactions to the underlying `X` ledger via a participant node.
``ReadService`` (`source code <https://github.com/digital-asset/daml/blob/master/ledger/participant-state/src/main/scala/com/daml/ledger/participant/state/v1/ReadService.scala>`__)
  is an interface abstracting over the ability to subscribe to
  changes of the `X` ledger visible to a particular participant node.
  The changes are exposed as a stream that is resumable from any particular
  offset, which supports restarts of the consumer.
  We typically expect there to be a single consumer of the data provided on
  this interface. That consumer is responsible for assembling the streamed
  changes into a view onto the participant state suitable for querying.
``<x>.Backend``
  is a class implementing the ``ReadService`` and the
  ``WriteService`` on top of the ``<X> services``. You need to implement this
  for your DAML on `X` ledger.
``IndexService`` (`source code <https://github.com/digital-asset/daml/blob/master/ledger/participant-state-index/src/main/scala/com/daml/ledger/participant/state/index/v1/IndexService.scala>`__)
  is an interface specific to the needs
  that the ``damlonx.Server`` class has for querying the participant state
  exposed by the ``ReadService``.
  It contains methods for all the different read access patterns the
  ``Server`` uses to serve the Ledger API. We include it in this diagram, as
  in the future there will be choice on what implementation of the
  ``IndexService`` to choose.
``index.v1.impl.reference.Indexer`` (`source code <https://github.com/digital-asset/daml/blob/master/ledger/participant-state-index/reference/src/main/scala/com/daml/ledger/participant/state/index/v1/impl/reference/ReferenceIndexService.scala>`__)
  is an in-memory implementation of
  the ``IndexService`` interface. We recommend using that until the SQL-based
  index service is ready. See this `GitHub issue
  <https://github.com/digital-asset/daml/issues/581>`_ for its status.
``damlonx.Server`` (`source code <https://github.com/digital-asset/daml/blob/master/ledger/api-server-damlonx/src/main/scala/com/daml/ledger/api/server/damlonx/Server.scala>`__)
  is a class containing all the code to implement the
  Ledger API on top of an ``IndexService`` and a ``WriteService``. Its
  constructor also takes additional arguments for configuring among others
  logging and the port at which the Ledger API is served.


.. _integration-kit_deploying:

Deploying a DAML Ledger
***********************

**TODO (BETA):**

- explain recommended approach for Ledger API
  authorization
  (`GitHub issue <https://github.com/digital-asset/daml/issues/669>`__)
- explain option of using a persistent SQL-backed participant state index
  (`GitHub issue <https://github.com/digital-asset/daml/issues/581>`__).
- explain how testing of DAML applications (ledger reset, time manipulation,
  scripted package upload) can be supported by a uniform admin interface
  (`GitHub issue <https://github.com/digital-asset/daml/issues/347>`__).



.. _integration-kit_testing:

Testing a DAML Ledger
*********************

**TODO (ALPHA):**

- explain how to use the ``ledger-api-test`` tool to test whether your
  implementation correctly implements the Ledger API
  (`GitHub issue <https://github.com/digital-asset/daml/issues/347>`__).


.. _integration-kit_benchmarking:

Benchmarking a DAML Ledger
**************************

**TODO (BETA):**

- explain how to use the ``ledger-api-bench`` tool to evaluate the
  performance of your implementation of the Ledger API
  (`GitHub issue <https://github.com/digital-asset/daml/issues/671>`__).

Commit message:

daml-integration-kit: clarify how to contact us

docs/source/daml-integration-kit/index.rst, after:

.. Copyright (c) 2019 Digital Asset (Switzerland) GmbH and/or its affiliates. All rights reserved.
.. SPDX-License-Identifier: Apache-2.0

DAML Integration Kit - PRE-ALPHA
################################

The DAML Integration Kit allows third-party ledger developers to
implement a DAML Ledger on top of their distributed-ledger or database of
choice. How does that work?

A DAML Ledger implementation is a server serving the
:doc:`/app-dev/ledger-api-introduction/index` as per the semantics defined in
the :doc:`/concepts/ledger-model/index` and the
`DAML-LF specification <https://github.com/digital-asset/daml/blob/master/daml-lf/spec/daml-lf-1.rst>`_.
Theoretically, you could
implement such a server from scratch following the above documentation.
Practically, we strongly recommend to use our integration kit and following
the guides below to

- :ref:`implement <integration-kit_implementing>`
- :ref:`deploy <integration-kit_deploying>`
- :ref:`test <integration-kit_testing>`
- :ref:`benchmark <integration-kit_benchmarking>`

your own DAML Ledger server.

Using these guides, you can focus on your distributed-ledger or database of
choice and reuse our DAML Ledger server and DAML interpreter code for
implementing the DAML Ledger API.


Status and roadmap
******************

The current status of the integration kit is PRE-ALPHA. We expect it to evolve
to ALPHA soon, BETA later, and GA quite a bit later. The roadmap below
explains what we mean by these different statuses, and what's missing to
progress.

PRE-ALPHA (current status)
  We develop the DAML Integration Kit in an open-first model. The PRE-ALPHA
  status means that there is enough information for interested third-parties
  to follow the *development* of the DAML integration kit. **We do though not
  make any stability guarantees!** Moreover the documentation is expected to
  contain holes, which are usually linked to GitHub issues.

ALPHA (`tracking GitHub issue <https://github.com/digital-asset/daml/issues/658>`__)
  Once we reach ALPHA status, the DAML Integration Kit is ready to be used by
  third-parties willing to accept the following caveats:

  - The architecture includes everything required to run DAML Applications in
    production. However, it misses support for testing DAML Applications in a
    uniform way against different DAML Ledgers. Concretely this means that
    Ledger API authorization, package upload, party on-boarding, ledger reset,
    and time manipulation are specific to each DAML Ledger. The reason
    for this is that it requires us to introduce APIs
    for uniform *administrative DAML ledger access*,
    which is different from the uniform *per-party DAML ledger access* that the
    DAML Ledger API provides. We will address this before reaching BETA
    status.
  - The architecture is likely to change due to learnings from pioneers like
    you! Where possible we strive to make these changes backwards compatible.
    This might though not always be possible.
  - The documentation might be spotty in some places, and you might have to
    infer some of the documentation from the code.
  - Some of our code might be fresh off the press and might therefore have a
    higher rate of bugs.

  That said: we highly value your feedback and input to direct our attention
  to where it provides the most value!
  You can get into contact with us using the feedback form on this
  documentation page or by creating issues or pull-requests against the `digital-asset/daml
  <https://github.com/digital-asset/daml>`__ GitHub repository.

  Use this `GitHub milestone <https://github.com/digital-asset/daml/milestone/4>`__
  to see the work outstanding to reach ALPHA status.


BETA (`tracking GitHub issue <https://github.com/digital-asset/daml/issues/660>`__)
  For us, BETA status means that we have architectural stability and solid
  documentation in place. At this point, third-parties should have everything
  they need to integrate DAML with their ledger of choice completely on their
  own.

  Before reaching BETA status, we expect to have:

  - hardened our test tooling
  - built tooling for benchmarking DAML ledgers
  - completed several integrations of DAML for different ledgers
  - implemented uniform *administrative DAML ledger access* to provide a
    portable way for testing DAML applications against different DAML ledgers

  Use this `GitHub milestone <https://github.com/digital-asset/daml/milestone/13>`__
  to see the work outstanding to reach BETA status.

GA (`tracking GitHub issue <https://github.com/digital-asset/daml/issues/661>`__)
  For us GA (General Availability) means that there are several
  production-ready DAML ledgers built using the DAML Integration Kit. We
  expect to reach GA in 2019.


DAML Ledger overview
====================

**TODO (ALPHA):** explain what ledgers exist; and what state they are in.
(`GitHub issue <https://github.com/digital-asset/daml/issues/673>`__)


.. _integration-kit_implementing:

Implementing your own DAML Ledger
*********************************


Architectural overview
======================

We explain how to implement a DAML ledger backed by a specific
ledger `X`. The backing ledger can be a proper distributed ledger or also just a database.
The goal of this implementation is to allow multiple DAML applications, which are potentially run by
different entities, to execute multi-party workflows using the ledger `X`. We
illustrate this in the following diagram.

.. image:: images/architecture-overview.svg

.. original: https://www.lucidchart.com/invitations/accept/69799877-4e80-444d-96a3-3e90814e94df

We assume that the `X` ledger allows entities to participate in the
evolution of the ledger via particular nodes. In the remainder of this
documentation, we call these nodes `participant nodes`.

The boxes labeled `daml-on-<X>-server` denote the DAML Ledger API
servers, which implement the DAML Ledger API on top of the services provided
by the `X` participant nodes.

The boxes labeled `<X>-daml-validator` denote `X`-specific DAML transaction
validation services. In a distributed ledger they provide the ability for
nodes to :doc:`validate DAML transactions </concepts/ledger-model/ledger-integrity>`
at the appropriate stage in the `X` ledger's transaction commit process.
Whether they are needed, by what nodes they are used, and whether they are run
in-process or out-of-process depends on the `X` ledger's architecture. Above
we depict a common case where the participant nodes jointly maintain the
ledger's integrity and therefore need to validate DAML transactions.


Message flow
------------

**TODO (BETA):**

- explain to readers the life of a transaction at a high-level, so they have a
  mental framework in place when looking at the example code.
  (`GitHub issue <https://github.com/digital-asset/daml/issues/672>`__)


Implementing your server and validator
======================================

Each `X` ledger requires at least the implementation of a specific
`daml-on-<X>-server`. It might also require the implementation of a
`<X>-daml-validator` as explained above. We provide two kinds of code to
simplify their implementation:

- Scala libraries for validating DAML transactions and serving the
  Ledger API given implementations of two specific interfaces. See
  the `Library infrastructure overview`_ for an overview of these
  libraries.

- A complete example of a DAML Ledger backed by an in-memory key-value store,
  in the
  `digital-asset/daml-on-x-example <https://github.com/digital-asset/daml-on-x-example>`__
  GitHub repository.
  It builds on our Scala libraries and demonstrates how they
  can be assembled to serve the Ledger API and validate DAML transactions.

  **TODO (ALPHA):** actually create this repository
  (`GitHub issue <https://github.com/digital-asset/daml/issues/139>`__)!

  For ledgers where data is shared between all participant nodes, we
  recommend using this example as a starting point for implementing your
  server and validator.

  For ledgers with stronger privacy models, this example
  can serve as an inspiration. You will need to dive deeper into how
  transactions are represented and how to communicate them to
  implement :doc:`DAML's privacy model </concepts/ledger-model/ledger-privacy>`
  at the ledger level instead of just at the Ledger API level.



Prerequisite knowledge
----------------------

Implementing your own server and validator requires a significant amount
of context to be learned before you can decide on your architecture and
implement it. Follow these three steps to acquire this context.

1. Complete the :doc:`/getting-started/quickstart`.
2. Get an in-depth understanding of the :doc:`/concepts/ledger-model/index`.
3. Build a mental model of how the :doc:`/app-dev/ledger-api-introduction/index`
   is used to build DAML Applications.


.. _integration-kit_writing_code:

Deciding on the architecture and writing the code
-------------------------------------------------

Once you've completed the above steps, we recommend following these four steps
to implement your own server and validator.

1. Clone our example DAML Ledger backed by an in-memory key-value store from
   the `digital-asset/daml-on-x-example <https://github.com/digital-asset/daml-on-x-example>`__.

   **TODO (ALPHA):** create this example repository
   (`issue <https://github.com/digital-asset/daml/issues/139>`__)

2. Read the example code jointly with
   the `Architectural overview`_ given above and
   the `Library infrastructure overview`_ given below.

3. Combine all the knowledge gained to decide on the architecture for your
   DAML on `X` ledger.

4. Implement your architecture; and let the world know about it by creating a
   PR against the
   `digital-asset/daml <https://github.com/digital-asset/daml>`__ repository
   to add your ledger to the `DAML Ledger overview`_.

If you need help, then feel free to use the feedback form on this documentation page or GitHub issues on the
`digital-asset/daml <https://github.com/digital-asset/daml>`__ repository to
get into contact with us.


Library infrastructure overview
-------------------------------

We provide the following four Scala libraries to help you implement your
server and validator. They are released as part of the DAML SDK. Changes
to them are explained as part of the :doc:`/support/release-notes`.
As explained in :ref:`integration-kit_writing_code`,
this section is best read jointly with the code in
`digital-asset/daml-on-x-example <https://github.com/digital-asset/daml-on-x-example>`__.

``participant-state.jar`` (`source code <https://github.com/digital-asset/daml/blob/master/ledger/participant-state/src/main/scala/com/daml/ledger/participant/state/v1/package.scala>`__)
  contains interfaces abstracting over the state of
  a participant node relevant for a DAML Ledger API server. These are the
  interfaces whose implementation is specific to a particular `X` ledger. These
  interfaces are optimized for ease of implementation.
``participant-state-index.jar`` (`source code <https://github.com/digital-asset/daml/tree/master/ledger/participant-state-index>`__)
  contains code for reading the abstract state
  of a participant node and indexing it to satisfy the read access
  patterns required for serving the Ledger API. The library provides both
  an interface enumerating all read access methods and an in-memory
  reference implementation of that interface.
  We expect to provide a persistent, SQL-backed index in the future
  (`tracking GitHub issue <https://github.com/digital-asset/daml/issues/581>`__).
``api-server-damlonx.jar`` (`source code <https://github.com/digital-asset/daml/blob/master/ledger/api-server-damlonx/src/main/scala/com/daml/ledger/api/server/damlonx/Server.scala>`__)
  contains code that implements a DAML Ledger API
  server given implementations of the interfaces in ``participant-state.jar``.
``daml-engine.jar`` (`source code <https://github.com/digital-asset/daml/blob/master/daml-lf/engine/src/main/scala/com/digitalasset/daml/lf/engine/Engine.scala>`__)
  contains code for serializing and deserializing DAML
  transactions and for validating them. An `<X>-daml-validator` is typically
  implemented by wrapping this code in the `X`-ledger's SDK for building
  transaction validators. ``daml-engine.jar`` also contains
  code for interpreting commands sent over the Ledger API. It is used
  by the `daml-on-<X>-server` to construct the transactions submitted
  to its participant node.

The following diagram shows how the classes and interfaces provided by these
libraries are typically combined to instantiate a DAML Ledger API server
backed by an `X` ledger.

.. image:: images/server-classes-and-interfaces.svg

.. original: https://www.lucidchart.com/invitations/accept/04239d8e-70ec-4734-b943-9780731fa704

The diagram uses boxes labeled with fully qualified class names to denote class instances.
It uses solid arrows labeled with fully qualified interface names to denote that an instance
depends on another instance providing that interface. It uses dashed arrows to
denote that a class instance provides or depends on particular services. It
uses boxes embedded in other boxes to denote that the outer class instance
creates the contained instances.

We explain the elements of the diagram in turn. For brevity, we drop prefixes
of their qualified names where unambiguous.

:doc:`/app-dev/ledger-api-introduction/index`
  is the collection of gRPC
  services that you would like your `daml-on-<X>-server` to provide.
``<X> services``
  are the services provided by our underlying ledger,
  which you aim to leverage to build your `daml-on-<X>-server`.
``<x>.LedgerApiServer``
  is the class whose main method or constructor
  creates the contained instances and wires them up to provide the Ledger API
  backed by the ``<X> services``. You need to implement this for your DAML on
  `X` ledger.
``WriteService`` (`source code <https://github.com/digital-asset/daml/blob/master/ledger/participant-state/src/main/scala/com/daml/ledger/participant/state/v1/WriteService.scala>`_)
  is an interface abstracting over the ability to submit
  DAML transactions to the underlying `X` ledger via a participant node.
``ReadService`` (`source code <https://github.com/digital-asset/daml/blob/master/ledger/participant-state/src/main/scala/com/daml/ledger/participant/state/v1/ReadService.scala>`__)
  is an interface abstracting over the ability to subscribe to
  changes of the `X` ledger visible to a particular participant node.
  The changes are exposed as a stream that is resumable from any particular
  offset, which supports restarts of the consumer.
  We typically expect there to be a single consumer of the data provided on
  this interface. That consumer is responsible for assembling the streamed
  changes into a view onto the participant state suitable for querying.
``<x>.Backend``
  is a class implementing the ``ReadService`` and the
  ``WriteService`` on top of the ``<X> services``. You need to implement this
  for your DAML on `X` ledger.
``IndexService`` (`source code <https://github.com/digital-asset/daml/blob/master/ledger/participant-state-index/src/main/scala/com/daml/ledger/participant/state/index/v1/IndexService.scala>`__)
  is an interface specific to the needs
  that the ``damlonx.Server`` class has for querying the participant state
  exposed by the ``ReadService``.
  It contains methods for all the different read access patterns the
  ``Server`` uses to serve the Ledger API. We include it in this diagram, as
  in the future there will be choice on what implementation of the
  ``IndexService`` to choose.
``index.v1.impl.reference.Indexer`` (`source code <https://github.com/digital-asset/daml/blob/master/ledger/participant-state-index/reference/src/main/scala/com/daml/ledger/participant/state/index/v1/impl/reference/ReferenceIndexService.scala>`__)
  is an in-memory implementation of
  the ``IndexService`` interface. We recommend using that until the SQL-based
  index service is ready. See this `GitHub issue
  <https://github.com/digital-asset/daml/issues/581>`_ for its status.
``damlonx.Server`` (`source code <https://github.com/digital-asset/daml/blob/master/ledger/api-server-damlonx/src/main/scala/com/daml/ledger/api/server/damlonx/Server.scala>`__)
  is a class containing all the code to implement the
  Ledger API on top of an ``IndexService`` and a ``WriteService``. Its
  constructor also takes additional arguments for configuring among others
  logging and the port at which the Ledger API is served.


.. _integration-kit_deploying:

Deploying a DAML Ledger
***********************

**TODO (BETA):**

- explain recommended approach for Ledger API
  authorization
  (`GitHub issue <https://github.com/digital-asset/daml/issues/669>`__)
- explain option of using a persistent SQL-backed participant state index
  (`GitHub issue <https://github.com/digital-asset/daml/issues/581>`__).
- explain how testing of DAML applications (ledger reset, time manipulation,
  scripted package upload) can be supported by a uniform admin interface
  (`GitHub issue <https://github.com/digital-asset/daml/issues/347>`__).



.. _integration-kit_testing:

Testing a DAML Ledger
*********************

**TODO (ALPHA):**

- explain how to use the ``ledger-api-test`` tool to test whether your
  implementation correctly implements the Ledger API
  (`GitHub issue <https://github.com/digital-asset/daml/issues/347>`__).


.. _integration-kit_benchmarking:

Benchmarking a DAML Ledger
**************************

**TODO (BETA):**

- explain how to use the ``ledger-api-bench`` tool to evaluate the
  performance of your implementation of the Ledger API
  (`GitHub issue <https://github.com/digital-asset/daml/issues/671>`__).
